---
author: "Tyler Lyle"
date: 2019-05-01
linktitle: gatorquery-contributions
title: GatorQuery Contributions
highlight: true
---

### What is GatorQuery?

For the second portion of CS481 Software Innovations, I worked in the team that was responsible for the Course Survey project.  Our task for this project was to implement a Google Forms-like survey that is capable of hosting an online survey that teachers can create and students can take.  However, the twist for this project that distinguishes it from that of Google Forms is that a teacher can use a terminal window and an endpoint to gather results for their survey without the need to open a browser, download a CSV file, and run an analysis tool on the CSV file.  Instead, this program makes it more convenient as a teacher can gather this data straight from the terminal.

Additionally, one of the lofty goals that our project would eventually achieve is the ability to download custom analyzers.  These would automatically analyze data output by the CSV file gather either from the web interface, or right from the terminal endpoint provided to the user.  This system would thus require a login for the teachers to create the survey, as well as some sort of data base system that would tie created surveys and responses to the teacher account.  As such, a teacher could then also use the web interface to get an endpoint to pull survey responses to their terminal.  A system such as this minimizes the amount of steps for teachers that want to collect responses.  Furthermore, this system would also need to create surveys either by uploading a CSV file, or creating them using the web interface.

### Contributions

While most of my contributions came in the form of extensive background knowledge in HTML and CSS, I also needed to delve further in to the back-end development during this project.  For our purposes, we decided to use Flask while developing this project as we had limited knowledge on web-development.  Not only is Flask a much simpler framework for web development, but the fact that another team developing an app for administering online quizzes was using it meant that we could receive aid from our colleagues as well.  Thus, I started my development on GatorQuery by first learning the Flask API.

Initial tutorials in Flask were very helpful, especially a [specific one](https://code-maven.com/a-polling-station-with-flask) I found early on.  In this tutotial, a very basic app is created demonstrating the roles of `@app.route()` functions in Flask.  These routes are used to designate a specific function to a given web-page action. For example, in this tutorial a `poll.py` program is run whenever a visitor clicks submit on a basic website only containing a question and radio box inputs corresponding to answers.  Flask allows us to gather this data from the website form and save it into our Python program.  Using this setup in the demo, a sample program was constructed where the `@app.route(/poll)` route would correspond to a submit action on the website.  The route would be linked to a `poll()` method, which would gather the radio response and save it in a file.  From here further work was done on the demo to add editable questions, as well as a way to analyze the results which were written to a `data.txt` file.

Once completed, I had a very basic idea of how Flask worked and communicated this to my team by showing them a demo and telling them my understanding of how Flask works.  Now that my team had an idea of how Flask worked, my team leader who had prior database experience set out to begin putting together the database pieces starting with the ability to log into our new system.  Additionally, me and two other team mates were tasked with setting up the login and register pages that would eventually be linked to the database.  However, it was at this point that we realized that some sort of flow chart or UML diagram would greatly benefit our design.

Taking inspiration from many other contemporary websites, we decided to begin development with a home page.  This home page would have a navigation bar at the top, with quick links to our home page, a dropdown menu for actions, as well as login and register quick links, as well.  The rest of the home page would have a description of the tool and a screenshot of the tool in use, as well as a bottom linkbar that would be displayed on every page.  With the home page acting as a central hub, every feature of our tool would be easily accessible.  Thus, development on the login/registration pages began immediately after the home page.

In terms of my own accomplishments, I had the most experience with CSS/HTML out of any of our group members.  As such, I was tasked with creating web pages for all of our functions, as well as providing the necessary links for other team members to pick up back-end development of the systems that these pages would link to.  Therefore, I had created the HTML/CSS responsible for displaying every web page: home, login, register, create survey, get endpoint, and downloads.  Additionally, I had created the initial application code that was responsible for running the application.  This code was relatively simple using Flask, with most of my goals being to initialize the app and render pages when links were clicked.  An example of the work I completed can be seen [here.](https://github.com/GatorEducator/gatorquery/tree/flask2.0)
